उत्तानपादनृपतेर्मनुनन्दनस्य
जाया बभूव सुरुचिर्नितरामभीष्टा ।
अन्या सुनीतिरिति भर्तुरनादृता सा
त्वामेव नित्यमगति: शरणं गताऽभूत् ॥१॥
उत्तानपाद-नृपते:-	king Uttaanpaad's
मनु-नन्दनस्य	who was the son of Manu
जाया बभूव सुरुचि:-	wife became Suruchi
नितराम्-अभीष्टा	extremely dear
अन्या सुनीति:-इति	the other (wife) named Suneeti
भर्तु:-अनादृता सा	she was neglected by her husband
त्वाम्-एव नित्यम्-	in Thee alone, who are eternal
अगति:-शरणं	refuge of the helpless (she)
गता-अभूत्	(in Thee) took refuge
To the king Uttaanpaada, the son of Manu, his wife Suruchi was extremely dear. The other wife Suneeti being ignored by her husband, was helpless and took shelter in Thee alone who are eternal refuge of the helpless.
अङ्के पितु: सुरुचिपुत्रकमुत्तमं तं
दृष्ट्वा ध्रुव: किल सुनीतिसुतोऽधिरोक्ष्यन् ।
आचिक्षिपे किल शिशु: सुतरां सुरुच्या
दुस्सन्त्यजा खलु भवद्विमुखैरसूया ॥२॥
अङ्के पितु:	on (his) father's lap
सुरुचि-पुत्रकम्-उत्तमं तं	Suruchi's son, that Uttama,
दृष्ट्वा ध्रुव: किल	seeing Dhruva indeed
सुनीति-सुत:-अधिरोक्ष्यन्	the son of Suneeti (who was) about to get up,
आचिक्षिपे किल शिशु:	the child was severely scolded
सुतरां सुरुच्या	as a result by Suruchi
दुस्सन्त्यजा खलु	indeed (jealousy) cannot be given up
भवत्-विमुखै:-	by those who are not devoted to Thee
असूया	jealousy
Seeing Uttama, Suruchi's son, seated on his father's lap, Suneeti's son Dhruva also tried to get up. But as a result, the child was severely scolded by Suruchi. Indeed, jealousy cannot be given up, by those who are not devoted to Thee.
त्वन्मोहिते पितरि पश्यति दारवश्ये
दूरं दुरुक्तिनिहत: स गतो निजाम्बाम् ।
साऽपि स्वकर्मगतिसन्तरणाय पुंसां
त्वत्पादमेव शरणं शिशवे शशंस ॥३॥
त्वत्-मोहिते पितरि	being under the influence of Thy Maayaa, the father
पश्यति दार्-वश्ये	seeing hen-pecked
दूरं दुरुक्ति-निहत: स:	he (Dhruva) was taken aback and hurt by the cruel words
गत: निज-अम्बाम्	(he) went to his own mother
सा-अपि	she also
स्व-कर्म-गति-सन्तरणाय	for getting over the effects of ones own actions
पुंसां	for human beings
त्वत्-पादम्-एव शरणं	Thy feet are the only refuge
शिशवे शशंस	(thus) she advised the child
The hen-pecked king who was under the influence of Thy Maayaa, silently looked on as Dhruva was scolded by Suruchi. Hurt for being scolded, Dhruva then went to his own mother Suneeti who advised him that the only way to overcome the evils of ones own past actions is to seek shelter at Thy feet.
आकर्ण्य सोऽपि भवदर्चननिश्चितात्मा
मानी निरेत्य नगरात् किल पञ्चवर्ष: ।
सन्दृष्टनारदनिवेदितमन्त्रमार्ग-
स्त्वामारराध तपसा मधुकाननान्ते ॥४॥
आकर्ण्य स:-अपि	hearing, he also
भवत्-अर्चन-निश्चित-आत्मा	determined to devote himself to Thy worship
मानी निरेत्य नगरात्	he who had self respect, leaving the town
किल पञ्च-वर्ष:	(though) indeed five years of age
सन्दृष्ट-नारद	meeting Naarada,
निवेदित-मन्त्र-मार्ग:-	and receiving instructions in the path of Mantra (japa)
त्वाम्-आरराध तपसा	propitiated Thee by penance
मधु-कानन-अन्ते	at the end of the forest named Madhu
The self respecting Dhruva, who was only five years of age, hearing his mother's words, became determined to worship Thee, and so left the town. In the forest of Madhuvana, he propitiated Thee by penance, following the method of Mantra japa and the Mantra given to him by Naarada, whom he had met on the way.
ताते विषण्णहृदये नगरीं गतेन
श्रीनारदेन परिसान्त्वितचित्तवृत्तौ ।
बालस्त्वदर्पितमना: क्रमवर्धितेन
निन्ये कठोरतपसा किल पञ्चमासान् ॥५॥
ताते विषण्ण-हृदये	while the father was full of remorse,
नगरीं गतेन श्रीनारदेन	by Shri Naarada, who had gone to the town
परिसान्त्वित-चित्त-वृतौ	(his) upset mind was consoled
बाल:-त्वत्-अर्पित-मना:	(meanwhile) the boy with his mind fixed on Thee
क्रम-वर्धितेन	with increasing
निन्ये कठोर-तपसा	intensity carried out severe penance
किल पञ्च-मासान्	indeed for five months
The king who was full of remorse, was pacified and consoled by Naarada who had gone to the town. Dhruva, the boy with his mind fixed on Thee, spent five months in severe penance, with increasing intensity.
तावत्तपोबलनिरुच्छ्-वसिते दिगन्ते
देवार्थितस्त्वमुदयत्करुणार्द्रचेता: ।
त्वद्रूपचिद्रसनिलीनमते: पुरस्ता-
दाविर्बभूविथ विभो गरुडाधिरूढ: ॥६॥
तावत्-तपो-बल-निरुच्छ्-वसिते	then,suffocated by the power of penance (of Dhruva)
दिगन्ते	all the directions
देव-अर्थित:-त्वम्-	to the devas who were seeking relief, (to them) Thou
उदयत्-करुणा-आर्द्र-चेता:	with a mind surging with compassion
त्वत्-रूप-चित्-रस-निलीन-मते:	(Dhruva) whose mind was absorbed with the Supreme Consciousness Bliss, which had assumed Thy form
पुरस्तात्-	in front ( of Dhruva)
आविर्बभूविथ	(Thou) appeared
विभो	O Lord!
गरुड-अधिरूढ:	mounted on Garuda
Then, when all around in all the directions there was suffocation by the power of Dhruva's penance, the devas were seeking relief. Then, Thou surging with compassion, appeared seated on Garuda, in front of Dhruva, whose mind was absorbed in contemplation of the Supreme Consciousness Bliss which had assumed Thy form.
त्वद्दर्शनप्रमदभारतरङ्गितं तं
दृग्भ्यां निमग्नमिव रूपरसायने ते ।
तुष्टूषमाणमवगम्य कपोलदेशे
संस्पृष्टवानसि दरेण तथाऽऽदरेण ॥७॥
त्वत्-दर्शन	at the sight of Thee
प्रमद-भार-तरङ्गितं तं	which completely overwhelmed him with waves of Bliss and ecstasy
दृग्भ्याम् निमग्नम्-इव	as if his eyes were submerged
रूप-रसायने ते	in the nectar of Thy entrancing form
तुष्टूषमाणम्-	desirous of singing Thy praise
अवगम्य	understanding (Thou)
कपोल-देशे	on the cheek
संस्पृष्टवान्-असि	Thou did touch (him)
दरेण	by the conch
तथा-आदरेण	and with great affection
At Thy divine sight, Dhruva was completely overwhelmed and was full of the the waves of Bliss and ecstasy. As his eyes were submerged in the nectar of Thy entrancing form he was desirous of singing Thy praise. Realising his incapability of finding words, Thou with great affection touched his cheek with the conch.
तावद्विबोधविमलं प्रणुवन्तमेन-
माभाषथास्त्वमवगम्य तदीयभावम् ।
राज्यं चिरं समनुभूय भजस्व भूय:
सर्वोत्तरं ध्रुव पदं विनिवृत्तिहीनम् ॥८॥
तावत्-	then
विबोध-विमलं	who had been cleansed of all taint by knowledge
प्रणुवन्तम्-एनम्-	who was profusely praising Thee
अभाषथा:-त्वम्-	Thou did tell (him)
अवगम्य तदीय-भावम्	knowing what he had in mind
राज्यं चिरं समनुभूय	(that) after enjoying kingship for long
भजस्व भूय:	attain, thereafter,
सर्वोत्तरं ध्रुव पदं	the loftiest of status of Dhruva
विनिवृत्ति-हीनं	from which there is no return
He then sang Thy praise profusely, having been purified and enlightened by pure knowledge. Knowing what he had in mind, Thou blessed him to enjoy the kingdom for long and then attain the loftiest of states, that of Dhruva, from where there is no return to lower states.
इत्यूचिषि त्वयि गते नृपनन्दनोऽसा-
वानन्दिताखिलजनो नगरीमुपेत: ।
रेमे चिरं भवदनुग्रहपूर्णकाम-
स्ताते गते च वनमादृतराज्यभार: ॥९॥
इति-ऊचिषि	having said so
त्वयि गते	when Thou had gone away
नृपनन्दन:-असौ-	this prince
आनन्दित-अखिल-जन:	pleasing all the people
नगरीम्-उपेत:	reached the town
रेमे चिरं	enjoyed for a long time
भवत्-अनुग्रह-पूर्ण-काम:-	with all his aspirations fulfilled by Thy grace
ताते गते च वनम्-	and when his father had gone to the forest
आदृत-राज्य-भार:	taking over the administration of the kingdom
When Thou disappeared after having said so, this prince Dhruva came back to town delighting all people. When his father had gone to the forest, taking over the administration of the kingdom, with all his aspirations fulfilled by Thy grace, he lived happily for a long time.
यक्षेण देव निहते पुनरुत्तमेऽस्मिन्
यक्षै: स युद्धनिरतो विरतो मनूक्त्या ।
शान्त्या प्रसन्नहृदयाद्धनदादुपेता-
त्त्वद्भक्तिमेव सुदृढामवृणोन्महात्मा ॥१०॥
यक्षेण	by Yaksha
देव	O Lord!
निहते पुन:-	being killed, then
उत्तमे-अस्मिन्	this Uttama (Dhruva's brother)
यक्षै: स युद्ध-निरत:	he engaged in a fight with the Yakshas
विरत: मनु-उक्त्या	and withdrew on Manu's advice
शान्त्या प्रसन्न-हृदयात्-	who was happy at the peaceful nature (of Dhruva)
धनदात्-उपेतात्	from Kuber who had approached him (Dhruva)
त्वत्-भक्तिम्-एव सुदृढाम्-	Thy firm devotion alone
अवृणोत्-	asked for as a boon
महात्मा	the great souled one (Dhruva)
When Uttama, Dhruva's brother was killed by Yaksha, Dhruva battled with Yaksha, but withdrew on Manu's advice. Pleased with Dhruva's peaceful nature, Kuber came and offered him a boon, but the great soul asked only for firm devotion to Thee.
अन्ते भवत्पुरुषनीतविमानयातो
मात्रा समं ध्रुवपदे मुदितोऽयमास्ते ।
एवं स्वभृत्यजनपालनलोलधीस्त्वं
वातालयाधिप निरुन्धि ममामयौघान् ॥११॥
अन्ते	finally
भवत्-पुरुष-नीत-विमान-यात:	going in the celestial car brought by Thy attendants
मात्रा समं	along with his mother
ध्रुवपदे मुदित:-अयम्-आस्ते	(he) is living happily even now in Dhruvaloka
एवं	in this manner
स्व-भृत्य-जन-पालन-लोल-धी:-त्वं	Thou who are ever eager minded to protect Thy devotees
वातालयाधिप	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
निरुन्धि	cure
मम-आमय-औघान्	my hoards of ailments
Finally, leaving along with his mother in the celestial car brought by Thy attendants, he is even now living happily in Dhruvaloka. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who are ever intent on protecting Thy devotees, cure my hoards of ailments.